---
title: Cpp Casts
tags: [cpp]
style:
color:
description: Static Cast, Dynamic Cast, Const Cast, Reinterpret Cast
---

# Cpp Casts
There are four main forms of cast in C++: `static_cast`, `dynamic_cast`, `const_cast` and `reinterpret_cast`. This article explores when and how you should use each.


## Static Cast
This is the most commonly used form of cast. It is used to convert between ordinary types. For instance, converting `int` to `float` or vice versa.

A common use case of `static_cast` would be if you needed to pass a certain primitive type to a function, but your variables are of the wrong type.
```cpp
void myFunction(double x) { ... }

int x = 3; // x is stored as int
myFunction(static_cast<double>(x)); // static_cast x to double
```

This form of casting is heavily preferred over traditional C style of casting:
```cpp
myFunction((double)x);  // C style of casting
myFunction(static_cast<double>(x)); // Cpp style of casting
```

There are three main reasons for this.

1. `static_cast` adds a compile time check for our casts. In the example below we try to cast a dynamically allocated into to a `char*`, which does not makes sense. Line 1 will compile, while line 2 will not compile.
```cpp
char* c = (char*)new int( 3 );                 //(1)
char* c1 = static_cast<char*>( new int( 3 ) ); //(2)
```

2. It is much easier to search `static_cast` in your code.


# Dynamic Cast
Unlike `static_cast`, `dynamic_cast` involves runtime checking. At runtime, it will safely cast pointers/references up/down/sideways in your inheritance heirarchy. A failed cast on a pointer type will return a `nullptr` and a failed cast on a reference type will throw an `std::bad_cast` exception.

This cast only works on polymorphic types: any class with at least one virtual method/destructor/base class.


This cast is commonly used in polymorphic situations in which you have a pointer/reference to a base class, but you would like to perform a derived class operation. `static_cast` can also be used in these scenarios, but they will not provide the same runtime checks.

```cpp
class Base {
public:
    virtual ~Base() {}
};
class Derived : public Base {};

Base *base = new Derived;
Derived *derived = dynamic_cast<Derived*>(base);
```


# Const Cast
This cast is used to remove the constness of a variable. For instance, it can be used to cast away the const in a const pointer so that it can be passed into a function that does not accept a const pointer.

```cpp
void someFunction(SomeObject *obj) { ... }

const SomeObject *const_ptr = createConstObjectPtr();
SomeObject *ptr = const_cast<SomeObject*>(obj);
someFunction(ptr);
```

If you modify a value that is initially declared const, the output will be undefined. That is, if `void someFunction(SomeObject *obj)` modifies `obj`, then we will have undefined behaviour.

# Reinterpret Cast
Reinterpret cast can be used to reinterpret the type of a variable. It is generally used to cast a pointer of one type to another type regardless of the relation between the two types.

```cpp
int* p = new int(65);
char* ch = reinterpret_cast<char*>(p);
```

# Summary
`static_cast` -> convert between ordinary types

`dynamic_cast` -> use for polymorphic types

`const_cast` -> cast away const

`reinterpret_cast` ->reinterpret the type

# Sources:
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/332030/when-should-static-cast-dynamic-cast-const-cast-and-reinterpret-cast-be-used
- https://stackoverflow.com/questions/103512/why-use-static-castintx-instead-of-intx
